so pretend you're this guy and you were
really productive earlier the month in
fact you are kind of killing it you're
reading lots of books hitting the gym
consistently and actually getting your
work in on time but then something
happened maybe you woke up on the wrong
side of the bed
maybe an invisible demon ghost violated
you in your sleep whatever the case may
be everything seems just a bit harder to
do you're tired you've lost all the
motivation you had to keep being awesome
and you can't even remember why you were
being productive in the first place and
that mental clarity that you seem to be
the beneficiary of just yesterday seems
to have ran away in the night and
unfortunately this lack of motivation
starts to seep into the other areas of
your life the thought dawns on you to go
to the gym and you're too lazy to do it
so you skip the gym that day one day
turns into two days two days turns into
a week you're also starting to buy more
junk food watch more TV play more video
games and not only are you not doing the
things you know you should be doing but
you don't even want to you can't even
remember why you were being productive
in the first place why are we still here
for a lot of people these long periods
of success followed by long periods of
self-destruction and failure seem to be
a common pattern and while this issue is
a deep psychological issue that I'll
dive into in a later video I wanted to
give you guys a more practical guide as
to how I get myself out of these type of
pseudo depressive ruts and start being
productive again now before we dive into
these really powerful strategies I just
want to preface the video with a couple
things number one is that this video is
not meant to be a replacement for going
to therapy if you actually have clinical
depression I'm not a doctor I'm just a
dude and I talk about what works for me
second of all even though this video is
about how to get out of a rut
efficiently or quickly that's all
relative you're usually not going to get
out of a rut overnight okay so strategy
number one is to utilize the dosomething
principle this principle is the catalyst
for action if you don't have the
motivation to do something you need
something that'll spark some sort of
action something to get the momentum
going something to get the ball rolling
and to do something principle is a means
to take action
when you don't have the motivation to do
anything so most people think that in
order to take action on anything you
need to be motivated to do that and
motivation comes when you're inspired by
something so for instance say you're
browsing reddit or something and you
come across a Matt D Avella video and by
the end he says something that strikes a
chord with you and you're inspired to
take action that inspiration served as
the adequate motivation to take action
on your goals but the dosomething
principle dictates that inspiration
motivation action is not a linear
sequence it's an endless loop and you
can start wherever you want to start so
it's far more efficient to start with
action and let that action become the
inspiration and the motivation necessary
to take further action so you may be
thinking thanks genius if I'm
unmotivated to do something then I
should just do something that's really
helpful but you actually take action
without motivation all the time do you
need some sort of huge inspirational
epiphany to take a shower no it's just
something you do these monotonous
actions are the very actions you should
be using as momentum to take further
action if you're just sitting there
waiting for inspiration to strike you go
brush your teeth brushing your teeth is
a little constructive action that will
give you momentum into taking further
action if you have to write a giant
essay don't think to yourself oh I have
to go and write my giant four thousand
word essay just say I'm gonna open up
the word doc write whatever comes to my
mind for one minute and that's it that's
all I have to do but once you start
writing you will tend to want to write
more because you've convinced yourself
to get there that is in essence to do
something principled now strategy number
two seems counterintuitive to what I
just said and that is to reward yourself
for small wins now if you follow this
channel at all I am NOT a pat yourself
on the back and everyone gets an award
kind of guy so if you're in the same
boat you might cringe at the thought of
rewarding yourself for taking a shower
or something like that because you know
you're capable of so much more but the
need to reward yourself for small wins
especially if you're in a vulnerable
situation is a psychological necessity
and it has everything to do with the
fact that you have basically two
a brain and I'm not talking about right
and left I'm talking more about the more
primal part of your brain which is
closer to the stem which is responsible
for motivation and emotion and stuff
like that and you're more logical
abstract moralistic part of your brain
which is present more in the prefrontal
cortex so if your prefrontal cortex
knows to use the do something principle
in order to convince but here a primal
side of your brain to take action on
something it's important that you're not
to iron-fisted with this because it's a
negotiation with yourself don't be a
slave driver to the primal side of your
brain or your primal side of your brain
won't feel listened to it'll lash out
and it won't want to do anything that
your logical side of your brain wants it
to do so you almost need to use your
higher judgment to provide compassionate
guidance to the primal part of your
brain and very gradually win it over if
you're too lazy to pretty much do
anything other than sit around all day
and you use the do something principle
to convince your primal side of your
brain to brush your teeth take a shower
get some nice clothes on and clean your
kitchen and you start to get really
tired and agitated after this take a
break
it may sound suspect and your logical
side of your brain knows that you should
be doing a lot more than that just take
it easy reward yourself for doing
something constructive for once after
days of binging dopamine and just relax
and have a good time so you might be
thinking how the heck am I supposed to
get out of a rut if I don't ride this
momentum out into the sunset
that's what tip number three is all
about so strategy number three is all
about progressive overload it's very
similar to the philosophy of lifting
weights and getting stronger
instead of yo-yoing between taking crazy
amounts of action and then your primal
brain lashing out and going into long
periods of self-destruction you should
be massaging yourself into organically
growing a lifestyle that you gradually
get used to that's more and more
productive and you do more and more
every day while rewarding yourself for
the small wins and comparing yourself to
who you were yesterday rather than who
someone else is today so for instance if
you develop a game plan over the course
of seven days to get out of a riot
that's a lot more realistic than just
trying to be productive all of a sudden
so say day one you
can't really do much other than go on
the internet for long periods of time on
this day if you convince yourself to
take pretty much any sort of
constructive action that should be
sufficient for the day day one should
just be about gradually taking a little
bit more action and being happy with
that and the next day remind yourself
that that wasn't so bad and actually
felt pretty good to take action and try
to do a little bit more and if you do
this day after day then gradually and
organically both sides of your brain
will be in agreeance and you'll very
comfortably start to rise from the ashes
like a phoenix and become the person
that you were earlier in that month I
can't stress how important this is
managing expectations being patient with
yourself and letting your higher
faculties be very communicative with the
more primal and emotional sides of your
brain this synergy between both sides of
your brain is integral for maintaining
long-term success and you can eventually
be very reliably and sustainably living
the kind of life that you've always
wanted to be living I want to give a
huge shout out to Skillshare for
sponsoring this video for those of you
who don't know Skillshare is an online
learning platform which has thousands of
classes covering dozens of
entrepreneurial productivity and
artistic topics it's also extremely
affordable with an annual membership it
comes in at less than $10 a month I just
finished watching my friend Thomas
Frank's productivity master class on
Skillshare taking Thomas Frank's
productivity master class helped me
realize that one of the most important
ways I can stay in that sustained
productivity lifestyle is to reduce the
amount of friction there is to actually
being productive a lot of this can be
achieved by creating a reliable
streamlined productivity system that
helps you get things done without the
headache because Skillshare is
sponsoring this video they're offering
you guys the better ideas viewers a
two-month free trial which means for two
months absolutely free you get unlimited
access to every single class on
Skillshare so right now you can check
out Thomas Frank's productivity course
for free using the link in the
description and while you're at it you
might as well check out all the other
classes on there as well
thanks again Skillshare for sponsoring
this video if you like this video make
sure to hit like because when you like
it the algorithm blesses me with shoving
this video in front of
people's faces helping them out this
will be especially helpful if somebody's
in a rut and because you liked this
video it ended up in their subscription
and this video was able to help them
climb out of the rut I'd love to hear
your guys's thoughts on how you climb
out of ruts everyone has their own
little strategies that helps them get
momentum back into their life so I'd
love to hear your thoughts on it if
you're lurking here consider subscribing
and hitting the bell icons so you don't
miss videos like these in the future
tons of amazing stuff happening on the
channel you're probably noticing that
there's more sponsor videos this allows
me to put more effort into the videos
because I spend less and less almost no
time now doing freelance videography so
I can rededicate that time to making
amazing content for you guys but yeah
that's all for today thank you for
watching and we'll catch you in the next
video
[Music]